let's just move off coronavirus just for
a moment take a question from
uh matthew eaton from that
ah thank you um how was the tourist
brexit
plan come from being oven ready to
a threat about economic and political
integrity
um john caldwell
thank you for that um well i don't think
that it was
first of all oven ready but
how would you have described it it was
partially developed
it there was a long long way actually
frozen associations because
you know if you look at what brussels
are doing
and i call them the brussels bolly boys
they were taking
eight billion pounds per year
net office they were benefiting by
80 billion pounds worth of trade benefit
in trading with britain as 80 billion
better trade for them than we were
receiving they were then
plundering our fishing waters
and all that with the eight billion
pounds now
any commercial minded businessman on the
planet would say
yes we'd love to do a free trade deal
with britain
we'd absolutely adore it because we're
going to gain
80 billion worth of trade deficit and
yet
they're bullying us and beating us up
they beat
theresa may black and blue and they've
continued
trying to do it all the way through
fortunately
boris rose to the challenge and fought
back
and this behavior by brussels
i find absolutely abhorrent but of
course the reason they're doing it is
because they've got no option because if
they gave britain an easy ride
the other european countries would see
that and
potentially there'd be an exodus
possibly a mass exodus
possibly a complete collapse of the
union and of course
that is not what brussels wants so they
will use any
means fair or foul to protect
their situation and make it look to any
country that dares to want to come out
of the union
that they will be crucified in the
process and look what they've done just
recently
threatened to cut off all britain's food
supplies
to northern ireland and that's appalling
john ashworth i mean it is curious isn't
it because
boris johnson told us he had another
oven ready deal he
he insisted on having a general election
in order to get a mandate
for his deal and his deal went through
parliament and we had we were lucky
enough to see a parade of ministers
on the television shows and in the
studios telling us that boris johnson
had got this great deal and we should
all celebrate that
boris johnson had confounded his critics
nadeem said
because it was such a brilliant a
brilliant deal now
six months down the line we're told that
it isn't such a brilliant deal
and we have to it has to be looked at
again because they didn't
understand apparently the implications
of the deal at the time
or they're either lying to us at the
time and now what they're doing is
is by bringing forward these particular
measures and the way in which they
uh affect the northern ireland protocol
they're actually talking about or
admitting that they're prepared
to break international law that is a
quite extraordinary position
for the united kingdom to be in a
country that helped create international
law who has been always been a proud
nation on the global stage making the
case
for international law and it's left us
in this rather sorry state of even the
next potentially
the next president of the united states
criticizing us
last night on uh on twitter and i just
sort of think that
why are they doing all this why are they
doing that is this time when in the
midst of a
global pandemic we can have
disagreements about how we should
respond to the pandemic but i think we
can all admit that it's a that it's a
pretty big issue that needs
the undivided attention of the
government why are they doing this now
when we need to be getting on with
dealing well i think i've
been misunderstood about these
negotiations from day one
you know you don't negotiate with your
hand it behind your back
we should have negotiated with brussels
from a really tough line right from the
beginning and we would have got this
done because every single factor is
compelling
why the eu should do this deal with
britain on
fair terms and the only non-compelling
factor
is the possible collapse of the eu as
every country starts to think do we
really want to be part of this shambles
and it's that that is causing the eu so
why is the eu not doing that then is it
because the uk government is just
poor at negotiating then why is if the
eu's so keen to have this deal
on the conservative government we're
dreadful i used to put my head in my
hands
and horror at the way we were
negotiating with brussels
you don't engage negotiate with bullies
by cajoling them and saying please and
can you do this
you fight bullies with the only weapon
that they understand and that's
force which is what boris has done and
now
they should be doing a deal with us they
should be saying yes you can have your
international fisheries waters back
what did they say they said you can have
your waters back but you'll never export
another piece of fish to
the whole of europe if you do well it's
disgusting
i'm sure if michelle barney was here and
of course michelle if you're watching
very well would you come on the program
i'm sure he deny that he is or that they
are acting as bully boys
let's just hear a bit from our audience
uh nathan
yeah if i may if i may ask based on the
government admitting that they're
willing to break international war
why why should they expect the rest of
us to follow the laws that they set
via twitter and statutory instructor for
instance
if i don't wear a face mask on the train
is that just a specific
and limited way of breaking the law and
therefore condoned by the government
no yeah i just wanted to clarify why
boris was seen as
fighting back against brussels when
instead he's now implementing something
which would
involve us breaking international law to
bypass um
the the agreement because that doesn't
seem like he's winning if he's having to
fall back to something that
affects us breaking that law
yeah you know no none of us here can
condone let me hear a bit more from the
audience john just just was saying
because it's question time so they can
put their questions
michael yeah i think's a bit rich with
john caldwell
banging the party political drum against
the other john there where he's done a
great job himself about showing where
his colors are uh basically here what's
quite clear
is that the government's committed it's
apparent that it's a no appeal brexit
whatever it takes and simply blaming and
bullying
as john appears to be doing there and
insulting puzzles
isn't really going to work i don't think
it's not really going strongly at the
moment is it
does anyone who's got their hands up
their support what
the government is doing uh katie you're
oh you're taking your hands out okay
because i know there are plenty are you
okay katie let's hear from you
no i absolutely don't say oh you don't
hang on because i know there are
there are plenty of brexiteers among you
so so ian let's hear from you
i think it's more of a an open oven
ready chicken stir fry this one because
i can't see the the way the economy is
going at the moment
if we have a no deal i can't see it
being much worse than it is
now or what's to come on the fuel lens
right okay well
um boris johnson's dear i mean the
question is
uh from matt has how has the toys brexit
deal gone from being oven ready to a
threat to our economic and political
integrity
i just wanted to to read something to
you this is a huge success for boris i
paid tribute to all his hard work and
congratulate him
for defying the odds this was a
description of the withdrawal agreement
agreed by but
johnson went to election who said that
me yes i know i'm good so so
how's it going from a huge success no
longer i'm going to
success at all so matt look um we left
the european union
with the withdrawal agreement and then
on the irish protocol
now within that especially on the
northern ireland protocol
uh the the eyes weren't dotted and the
t's weren't crossed
and both sides agreed that there will be
a joint committee
to deal with the details of that
where we are today we're negotiating a
future
arrangement between ourselves and the eu
we've deliberately
not not asked for a bespoke special
unique deal because
the moment you ask for something that's
never been written down before the
lawyers have a field day
and it will take forever to deliver well
lots of lawyers are resigning actually
and let me run that let me let me just
finish this point
this is an important point right we've
deliberately asked for a deal
like canada something that the european
union have done before or like with
japan
right from the european union now we're
negotiating in good faith
it is not about us actually not
delivering
on the withdrawal agreement and the
northern irish protocol
it is about how we deliver on those
things we're investing
in infrastructure you've all heard this
week about sanitary and
phyto sanitary the point that john
caldwell is making about food we're
investing in infrastructure
in northern ireland the northern ireland
secretary is putting
well two billion pounds to get stormont
back operational because we had to have
it back operational
because of our commitment to withdrawal
agreement but now
that's offline no that is off the point
how has it gone for being a
deal that you thought was a huge success
you went to the country with because
obviously the one that you know you know
i am confident that we will get a deal
we are negotiating in good faith
michelle monsieur barnier is also
negotiating in
good faith and i think both sides can
get to what the prime minister
said is we can't keep negotiating
forever there are still
significant gaps on fishing and on what
they call level playing field i.e state
subsidy
now we've just announced a deal with
japan a really historically a much
bigger deal
than we would have had with japan if
we're still part of the eu
and there again we have announced how we
will deal with state subsidy
which should reassure our european
friends as well
so i'm confident that we will get a deal
on the future if both sides negotiate
by the 15th of october beyond which the
promise is right to say
that businesses around the country and
i'm the business and industry minister
need certainty so we need to make sure
that if we can't get a deal
on the terms of canada we'll go for an
australia deal and we will support our
business which is which is no deal and
australia
means no no well understanding on wto
which is no deal trades with the euro
would you i just just wondered if you
wanted to answer
nathan's point about because we had the
northern ireland secretary
saying not once but twice and he should
know because about the
uh northern ireland protocol that this
is breaking
the law in a very specific and limited
way would you use nathan
suggesting sanction other law breaking
in a very specific and limited way
tell us about the rule of significance
the withdrawal agreement does not
uh and the uh uk internal market bill
does not do that the clause
the attorney general has written to the
committee the select committee is
responsible
making very clear what the legal
position is okay so just
no hang on whatever so just so we're
clear yes
the northern ireland says it breaks the
law are you saying differently no i'm
not saying different i'm saying to you
exactly what the attorney general has
written to the select committees and the
northern ireland
uh secretary has said what i'm saying is
that no
government can stand by and watch a part
of its country and a community within
its country
northern ireland be harmed in any way
that's not obvious
these clauses nathan are an insurance
policy we've added to them that
parliament has to vote parliament
is sovereign poland would have to vote
if the government has to invoke them
to protect the peace process and the
communities of northern ireland because
what we can't do
to john caldwell's point is have a
situation where the extreme
interpretation of the northern irish
protocol
would actually stop us from sending food
sixty-five percent of our trade with
northern ireland
um uh uh okay it was with gb
that's actually not what nathan was
asking so let me just hear a bit more
from this
his question no his question was very
specifically given that the government
is breaking the law in a specific
limited way
is okay for everyone i'm saying you
can't extrapolate in that way because
you can't watch
a part of your country be harmed and the
peace pressure be harmed
and be a bystander all right okay i hope
we're here from the restaurant is there
an insurance policy charlotte let's hear
from you
yeah so the panel are talking about
breaking the law if these negotiations
don't go well
um it'll be the case that uk law
enforcement loses access to really
crucial european crime fighting systems
and this is a real concern for everybody
in the law enforcement community
and i don't know the panel think about
that but the way the negotiations are
deteriorating this is looking more and
more likely and the workarounds are
really um
not efficient zane have you had your
hand up
a moment ago hi yeah i just wanted to
follow on from nathan's question is it
not hypocritical that the government is
advising the nation to support their
neighbours for breaking the law
however the government themselves intend
to reach the rule of law
okay nikki you i'll come back to you
john nicki you're smiling at that
i i am smiling at that and at the
previous question about law breaking i
mean the rule of six
is quite interesting because the rule of
six feels like it's clear
and then you you know that people are
going to pubs going to restaurants
they're stomping around on malls dressed
in breeches
shooting grouse um well nikki let's come
back to matthew's question though which
was which was about
less clear well let's come back to
matthew's question which is about
has how has a tory's brexit deal gone
from being oven ready
to a threat to our economic and
political integrity those are matt's
words
my view on that is that so i ardently
wanted to remain in europe and i think
i'll be sad until the day i die that
were leaving but
completely accepted that 52 percent
of the country voted to leave
but 52 percent of the country did not
vote
to leave in a kind of chaotic disastrous
way
that's also driving the country mad with
boredom i think we seem to be
locked into this terrifyingly pedantic
conversation
about minutiae which is very important
but it makes
most of us lose the will to live i'd say
can i come back on something
okay let me just bring you next thing
she's not taught but i will let you come
back in it
what are my views are you losing the
will to live um well i'm just thinking
that here are two shambles
there's the way that this pandemic has
been dealt with and there's the way
brexit
is being is unfolding and in both cases
i'm worried about
the economically vulnerable water we get
i think in both cases we need to
identify
i again i agree i don't want to write up
in many cases in this case i don't have
the
qualifications to do dwell on the
niceties
what i want to see is that we identify
the vulnerable
and protect them and i think that should
be our fundamental goal
and that is where we should invest
john you're trying to come in yeah i
really think the points that nathan and
zayn have made
they are really are quite important and
i know i you know i
i have sympathy for you as a minister
because they may be slack you may find
them slightly
you might think they're slightly
frustrating questions or
but the actions of governments
and the actions of ministers have
consequences
and we're in the midst of a crisis we're
asking the british people to make
immense sacrifices the rule of six
in oldham in leicester now in newcastle
and sunderland
not going into other people's houses not
seeing your family members in your own
in private gardens
i think the sacrifices i think these
restrictions are warranted
probably disagree with colleagues here
but i agree with the government
that these restrictions are necessary to
try and bring infections down
i think we also need to sort out test
and tracing sorry for being party
political but it is a shambles and needs
fixing
right but at the same time you're asking
people to follow the law
face masks rule of six not going into
our houses
and you're actually completely admitting
that you're going to be breaking
international law
so do not appreciate that when we're in
a pandemic and we're
asking people to follow so many
different restrictions and rules
that the very least the government
should do is follow the law themselves
can i come back
on this point to uh zainab and nathan um
parliament will make that decision
parliament is sovereign
why do i say that to you because
actually the german parliament at times
has actually taken votes that move away
from international
agreements within europe because they
deem it unconstitutional
to their country the canadian parliament
has has actually voted on things where
they've signed international treaties
but they've moved away from it in
domestic law making
so the same thing will happen here in
our parliament we're not saying this
will happen all we're doing is saying
we need the safeguards we need an
insurance policy
that we can't allow one part of the
united kingdom
northern ireland the communities of
knowledge to be harmed in any way
by some extreme interpretation of the
northern irish
protocol we will bring it back to
parliament
to trigger those clauses if we need to
to protect
the unfettered access of northern
ireland
to great britain that is already by the
way respected in the withdrawal
agreement so
this has precedent internationally and i
think it'd be
wrong and unfair to extrapolate that to
breaking the rule of six
or to breaking any other rules um in our
country so
that is all i would say to you okay and
nathan uh peter
yeah i i don't condone the version of
international law though states do it
quite often
i think um a really dangerous thing with
the future of being a brexit
um uh is that future trade deals say the
one with japan which is i think it's
really impressive i think it's great
um in the future will states
be looking to make deals with us and in
the case of the word we might renege on
it or pull back
and i'm saying this other brexits here i
just don't think it's great going
forward um the states might think well
that they've
had an agreement here and they might
come back with us and then that may that
may stop harm
on future relations worldwide i don't
know what everyone thinks about that but
i think it's quite an interesting view
for the future but peter people can see
that we have we are doing it
in the extreme case um that
um the interpretation uh
beyond it japan agreed to deal with us
because they see the benefits
of a deal with the united kingdom which
i think you were referring to earlier
katie
so northern towns like oldham are
already
disproportionately affected by
coronavirus
and i think we're also going to be
disproportionately affected
by a no deal brexit we were on holiday
in copenhagen last year and we were
talking to people there
and they said look we we never have a
majority government
anytime anyone wants to form a
government here people need to sit down
and they need to negotiate with each
other
and they they they were absolutely
flabbergasted that our uk
government doesn't seem to understand
what negotiation is
it's not standing there and shouting at
the
foreigners you know you need to sit
round the table and negotiate properly
otherwise
do you know who's going to lose it's not
going to be london it's going to be
northern towns like
oldham yeah and that
um yeah so i was um it was just to go
back to the point of
um yes it said it was over ready but um
nadeem said that eyes needed to be
dotted and t's crossed
so it was never oven ready when
the uk came out of the uh shared customs
territory it was always going to be but
northern ireland was going to be
different it is
the uk but it is the only part of the uk
with a land border
so we knew that if this was going to
happen
so it was just another example of the
government
spinning and basically just lying to us
[Music]
again